Hi everyone, I'm Francois. I'm super
excited to share with you some of my
ideas about HGI and how we're going to
get there. This chart right there is one
of the most important facts about the
world. The cost of compute has been
consistently falling by two orders of
magnitude every decade since 1940.
There's no sign that is stopping anytime
soon. And in AI, compute and data have
long been the primary bottleneck to what
we could achieve. And in 2010s, as you
all know, with the abundance of GPU
based compute and large data sets, deep
learning really started to work. And all
of a sudden, we are making fast progress
on problems that had long seemed
intractable across computer vision and
natural language processing. And in
particular, self-supervised text
modeling started to work. And the
dominant paradigm of AI became scaling
up LM3 training. And this approach was
crushing almost all benchmarks and
remarkably it was getting predictably
better benchmark results as we scaled up
model size and train data size with the
exact same architecture and the exact
same training process. That's the
scaling laws that Jared told you about a
few minutes ago. So it really seemed
like really it all figured out and many
people extrapolated that more scale uh
was all that was needed to solve
everything and get to a GI. Our field
became obsessed with the idea that
general intelligence would spontaneously
emerge by cramming more and more data
into bigger and bigger models. But there
was one problem. We were confused about
what these benchmarks really meant.
There's a big difference between
memorized skills which are static and
task specific and fluid general
intelligence the ability to understand
something you've never seen before on
the fly. And back in 2019 before the
rise of LLMs I released an AI benchmark
to highlight this difference. Uh it's
called the abstraction reasoning corpus
or ark1.
And from uh at that time back in 2019 to
now with a model like GP4.5 for instance
there's been a roughly 50,000x scale up
of basel and we went from 0% accuracy on
that benchmark to roughly 10%. Which is
not a lot. It's very close to zero if
you take into account the fact that any
one of you in this room would score well
above 95%.
So to crack general fluid intelligence,
it turns out we needed new ideas beyond
just scaling up pre-training and doing
static inference. This benchmark was not
about uh regurgitating memorized skills.
It was really about making sense of a
new problem that you've never seen
before on the fly. But then last year in
2024, everything changed. the AI
research community started pivoting to a
new and very different pattern test
adaptation creating models that could
change their own state at test time to
adapt to something new. So this wasn't
about quering pre-loaded knowledge
anymore. It was really about the ability
to learn and adapt at inference time and
suddenly we started seeing significant
progress on ARC. So finally we had AI
that was showing genuine signs of fluid
intelligence. So in particular in
December last year, OpenAI previewed its
uh 03 model and they used a version of
it that was uh fine-tuned specifically
on ARC and that showed human level
performance on that benchmark to the
first time and today in 2025 we have
suddenly moved on from the pre-training
scaling pattern and we're now fully in
the era of Tesla adaptation. So Tesla
adaptation is all about the ability of a
model to modify its own behavior
dynamically based on the specific data
it encounters during inference. So that
covers techniques like test time
training, program synthesis, train of
thought synthesis where the model tries
to reprogram itself uh for the task at
hand. And today every single AI approach
that performs well on ARC is using one
of these techniques. So today I want to
answer the following questions. First,
why did the pre-training scaling
paradigm not get us to a GI? If you look
back just two years ago, this was the
standard dogma. Everybody was saying
this and today almost no one believes
this anymore. So what happened? And
next, does this adaptation get us to AGI
this time? And if that's the case, maybe
AGI is already here. Some people believe
so. And finally, besides uh the sign
adaptation, what else might be next for
AI?
And to answer these questions, we have
to go back to a more fundamental
question. What is even intelligence?
What what do we mean when we say we're
trying to build AGI? If you look back
over the past decades, there's been two
lines of thoughts to define intelligence
and to define the goals of AI. There's
the Minsky style view. Uh AI is about
making machines that are capable of
performing tasks uh that would normally
be done by humans. And this echoes very
closely uh the current mainstream
corporate view that AGI would be uh a
model that could perform most
economically valuable tasks like 80% is
often quoted as as the number. But then
there's the mac view that AI is about
getting machines to handle problems they
have not been prepared for. It's about
getting AI to deal with something new.
And my view is more like the MATI view.
Intelligence is a process and skill is
the output of that process. So skill
itself is not intelligence and
displaying skill at any number of tasks
does not show intelligence. This is like
the difference between a road network
and a road building company. If you have
a road network, then you can go from A
to B for a specific predefined set of
A's and B's. But if you have a road
building company, then you can start
connecting new A's, new B's on the fly
as your needs evolve. So intelligence is
the ability to deal with new situations.
It's the ability to blaze fresh trails
and build new roads. So attributing
intelligence towards really a
crystallized behavior program, a skill
program, that's a category error. You
are confusing the process and its
output. So don't confuse the road and
the process that created the road. So to
formalize this a bit, I see intelligence
as the conversion ratio between the
information you have uh mostly your past
experience but also any uh developer
imparted prior that the system might
have and your operational area over the
space of potential future situations
that you might encounter and that's
going to feature high novelty and
uncertainty. So intelligence is the
efficiency with which you operationalize
past information in order to deal with
the future. It's an efficiency ratio and
that's the reason why using exam like
benchmarks models is a bad idea. They're
not going to tell you how close we are
to AGI because human exams weren't
designed to measure intelligence. They
were designed to measure task specific
skill and knowledge. They were designed
according to assumptions that are
sensible for humans but not for
machines. Like for instance, most exams
assume that you haven't read and
memorized all the exam questions and the
answers beforehand. So if you want to
regly define and measure intelligence,
here are some key concepts that you have
to take into account. The first is the
distinction between static skills and
fluid intelligence. So between having
access to a collection uh of static
programs to solve known problems versus
being able to synthesize brand new
programs on the fly to face a problem
you never seen before. And of course
it's not a binary. It's not one or the
other. There's a spectrum between the
two. The second concept is operational
area for a given skill. There's a big
difference between being skilled only in
situations that are very close to what
you've seen before and uh being skilled
for any situation within a very broad
scope. For instance, if you know how to
drive, you should be able to drive in
any city, not just uh in a specific
geopence area. Like you can learn to
drive in San Jose and then move to
Sacramento and you can still drive,
right? Again, so it's there's a spectrum
there. It's not it's not binary. And
lastly, you should look at uh
information efficiency for a given
skill. How much information, how much
data, how much practice did you need to
acquire that skill? And of course,
higher information efficiency means
higher intelligence. And the reason
these definitions matter a lot is that
as engineers, we can only build what we
measure. So the way we define and
measure intelligence is not a technical
detail. It really reflects our
understanding of the problem of
cognition. It scopes out the the
questions we're going to be asking and
so it determines the answers that we're
going to be getting. It's the feedback
signal that drives us towards our goals.
And a phenomenon you see constantly in
engineering is the shortcut rule. So
it's it's the fact that when you focus
on uh achieving a single measure of
success, you may succeed but you will do
that at the expense of everything else
that was not captured by your measure.
So you hit the target but you miss the
points and you see this all the time uh
on Kaggle for instance. Uh we saw it
with the Netflix prize where the winning
system was extremely accurate but it was
way too complex to ever be used in
production. So it ended up never being
used. It was effectively pointless. Uh
we also saw it in AI uh with chess
playing for AI. The reason the AI
community set out to create uh programs
that could play chess back in the 70s
was because uh people expected this
would teach us about human intelligence.
And then a couple decades later, we
achieved a goal when Deep Blue beat
Kasparov, the world champion. And in the
process we had really learned nothing
about intelligence. So you hit the
targets but you miss the points. And for
decades AI has chased task specific
skill because that was our definition of
intelligence. But this definition only
leads to automation which is exactly the
kind of system that we have today. But
we actually want AI that's capable of
autonomous invention. We don't want to
stop at automating known tasks. We want
AI that could tackle humanity's most
difficult challenges and accelerate
scientific progress. That's what AGI is
meant to be. And to achieve that, we
need a new target. We need to stop
targeting fluid intelligence itself, the
ability to adapt and invent. So one
definition of AGI only enops automation.
So it increases economic productivity.
Obviously, it's extremely valuable.
Maybe it also increases unemployment.
But the other definition unlocks
invention and the acceleration of the
timeline of science. And it's by
measuring what you really care about
that we'll be able to make progress. So
we need a better target. We need a
better feedback signal.
What does that look like? My first
attempt at creating a way to measure
intelligence in AI systems was the RKGI
benchmark. So I released ARK1 back in uh
2019. It's like an IQ test for machines
and also humans. So ARK1 contains 1,000
tasks like this one here. And each task
is unique. So that means that you cannot
cram for ARC. You have to figure out
each task on the fly by using your
general intelligence rather than your
memorized knowledge. And of course
solving any problem always requires some
knowledge. And in the case of most
benchmarks, the knowledge prior that you
need are typically left implicit. In the
case of ARC, we made them explicit. So
all ARC tasks are built entirely on top
of core knowledge prior which are things
like objectness, uh elementary physics,
um basic geometry, topology, counting.
So concepts that any fouryear-old child
has already mastered. And solving arc
requires very little knowledge and it's
knowledge that is very much not
specialized. So you don't need to
prepare for arc in order to solve it.
And what makes arc unique is that you
cannot solve it purely by memorizing
patterns. It really requires you to
demonstrate through the intelligence.
And meanwhile pretty pretty much every
other benchmark out there is targeting
fixed known tasks. So they can't
actually be solved or hacked via
memorization alone. That's what makes
ARC fairly easy for humans but very
challenging for AI. And when you see a
problem like this where a human child
can perform really well but the most
advanced the most sophisticated AI
models out there struggle that's like a
big red flashing light telling you that
we're missing something that new ideas
are needed. One thing I want you to keep
in mind is that ARC is not going to tell
you whether a system is already a GR or
not. That's not its purpose. Arc is
really a tool to direct the attention of
the research community towards what we
see as the most important unsolved
bottlenecks on the way to AGI. So ARC is
not the destination and solving ARC is
not the goal. Arc is really just an
arrow pointing in the right direction
and ARC has completely resisted the
pre-training scaling paradigm. Even
after a 50,000x scale up of pre-trained
baselons, their performance on ARC
stayed near zero. So we can decisively
conclude that fluid intelligence does
not emerge from scaling up pre-training.
You absolutely need test adaptation in
order to demonstrate genuine fluid
intelligence. And importantly when the
arrival of test adaptation happened last
year, ARC was really the only benchmark
at the time that provided a clear signal
about the profound shift that was
happening. other benchmarks were
saturated. So they could not distinguish
between a true IQ increase and just
brute force scaling.
So now you you see this graph and you're
probably asking well clearly at this
point AR1 is also saturating. So does
that mean we have human level AI now?
Well not yet. What you see on this graph
is that ARK1 was a binary test. It was a
minimal reproduction of fluid
intelligence. So it only really gives
you two possible modes. Either you have
no fluid intelligence in which case you
will score near zero like basel or you
have nonzero fluid intelligence in which
case you will instantly score very high
like the O3 model from open eye for
instance. And of course every one of you
in this room would score within noise
distance of 100%. So ARC saturates ARK
one saturates way below human level
fluid intelligence. And so now we are in
need of a better tool, a more sensitive
tool that would provide more useful
bandwidths and better comparison with
human intelligence
and that tool is ARGI 2 which released
in March this year. So back in 2019,
ARK1 was meant to challenge the deep
learning pattern where models are big
parametric curves uh used for static
inference and today ARK 2 challenges
reasoning systems. It changes the test
adaptation pattern. The benchmark format
is still the same. There's a much
greater focus on probing compositional
jarization. So the tasks are still very
feasible for humans, but they're much
more sophisticated. And as a result, ARK
2 is not easily brute forceable. In
practice, what this means is that in ARK
one, for many tasks, you could just look
at it and instantly see the solution
without having to think too much about
it. With ARK 2, all tasks require some
level of deliberate thinking, but they
still remain very feasible for humans.
And we know this because we tested 400
people firsthand in person in San Diego
over several days. And we are not
talking about people who have physics
PhDs here. We recruited uh random folks
uh Uber drivers, UCDS students, uh
people who are unemployed. So basically
anyone trying to make some money on the
side and all tasks in AR 2 were sold by
at least two of the people that saw it.
And each task was seen on average by
about seven people. And so what that
tells you is that a group of 10 random
people with majority voting would score
100% on ARK 2. So we know these tasks
are completely doable by regular folks
with no prior training. So how well do
AI models do? Well, if you take basel
models like GPT4.5,
Lama 4, it's simple. They get 0%. There
is simply no way to do these tasks
simply via memorization. Next, if you
look at static reasoning systems, so
systems that use a single chin of
thoughts that they generate for the
task, they don't do much better. They do
on the order of one to 2%. So very much
within noise distance of zero. So what
that tells you is that to solve AR 2,
you really need test adaptation. All
systems that do meaningfully above zero
are using TTL, but even then they're
still far below human level. So compared
to ARK1, AR2 enables much more granular
evaluation of DTS systems. Systems like
03 for instance. And that's where you
see that 03 and other systems like it
are still not yet quite human level. And
in my view, as long as it's easy to come
up with tasks that any one of you can do
that are easy for humans, but that AI
cannot figure out no matter how much
computers are it, we don't have a GI
yet. and you will know that we are close
to having AGI when it becomes
increasingly difficult to come up with
such tasks. We're clearly not there yet.
And to be clear, I don't think ARK 2 is
the final test. We're not going to stop
at ARC 2. We've started development on
RKGI 3 and AR 3 is a significant
departure from the input output pair
formats of ARC one and two. We're
assessing agency, the ability to
explore, uh, to learn interactively, to
set goals, uh, achieve goals
autonomously. So, your AI is dropped
into a brand new environment where it
doesn't know what the controls do. It
doesn't know what the goal is. It
doesn't know where the the gameplay
mechanics are, just to figure out
everything on the fly, starting with
what is it even supposed to do uh, uh,
in the game. And every single game is
entirely unique. They're all built on
top of core knowledge prior only, just
like in AR one and two. So we'll have
hundreds of interactive reasoning tasks
like this one. And efficiency is central
to the design of AR 3. So models won't
just be graded on whether they can solve
a task, but on how efficiently they
solve it. And we are establishing a
strict limit of the number of actions
that a model can take. And we are
targeting the same level of action
efficiency as we observe in human. So
we're going to launch this in early 2026
and next month in July we're going to
release a developer preview so you can
start playing with it. What's it going
to take to solve AR 2 and we're still
very far from it today. Uh then solve AR
3 and we're even further away from that.
Maybe in the future solve AR 4
eventually get to AGI. What are we still
missing? So I've said that intelligence
is the efficiency with which you
operationalize the past to face a
constantly changing future. But of
course if the future you face had really
nothing in common with the past, no
common ground with anything you've seen
before, you could not make sense of it
no matter how intelligent you were. But
here's the thing. Nothing is ever truly
novel. The universe around you is made
of many different things that are all
similar to each other. Like one tree is
similar to another tree is also similar
to your neuron or electromagnetism
is similar to hydrodnamics is also
similar to gravity. So we are surrounded
by isomorphisms.
I call this the kaleidoscope hypothesis.
Our experience of the world seems to
feature a neverending novelty and
complexity. But the number of unique
atoms of meaning that you need to
describe it is actually very small. And
everything around you is a recombination
of these atoms. And intelligence is the
ability to mine your experience to
identify these atoms of meaning that can
be reused across many different
situations, across many different tasks.
And this involves identifying um
invariance uh structure uh things that
seem to be repeated principles.
And these building blocks, these atoms
are called abstractions. And whenever
you encounter a new situation, you're
going to make sense of it by recombining
on the fly abstractions from your
collection to create a brand new model
that's adapted to the situation. So
implementing intelligence is going to
have two key parts. First, there's
abstraction acquisition. You want to be
able to efficiently extract reusable
abstractions from your past experience,
from a feed of data, for instance. And
then there's on the-fly recombination.
You want to be able to efficiently uh
select and recombine these building
blocks uh into models that are fit for
the current situation. And the emphasis
on efficiency here is crucial. How
intelligent you are is not just
determined by whether you can do
something. It's determined by how
efficiently you can acquire good
abstractions from ret experience. how
efficiently you can recombine them to
navigate novelty. So if you need
hundreds of thousands of hours to
acquire a simple skill, uh you're not
very intelligent. Or if you need to
enumerate every single move on the
chessboard to find the best move, you're
not very intelligent. So intelligence is
not just demonstrating high skill. It's
really the efficiency with which you
acquire and deploy these skills. It's
both data efficiency and compute
efficiency. And at this point, you start
to see why simply making our AI models
bigger and training them on more data
didn't automatically lead to a GI. We
were missing a couple of things. First,
these models lacked the ability to do on
the-fly recombination. So at training
time, they were learning a lot. They
were acquiring many useful abstractions,
but then at test time, they were
completely static. You could only use
them to fetch and apply a pre-recorded
template. And that is a critical problem
that test adaptation is addressing. TTA
adds on the re combination capabilities
to our AI. And that's actually that's a
huge step forward that gets us much much
closer to a GI. That's not the only
problem. Recombination is not the only
thing missing. The other problem is that
these models are still incredibly
inefficient. If you take gradient
descent for instance, gradient descent
uh requires vast amounts of data to
distill simple abstractions many orders
of magnitude more data than what humans
need roughly three to four orders of
magnitude more. And if you look at uh uh
re combination efficiency, even the
latest state-of-the-art CTA techniques,
they still need thousands of dollars of
compute uh to solve ARK1 at human level.
And that doesn't even scale to AR 2. And
the fundamental issue here is that deep
learning models are missing
compositional generalization. And that's
the thing that ARK 2 is trying to
measure. And the reason why is that
there's more than one kind of
abstraction. And this is really
important. I said that intelligence is
about mining abstractions from data and
then re combining them. There's really
two kinds of abstraction. There's type
one and type two. They're pretty similar
to each other. They mirror each other.
So both are about comparing things,
comparing instances and merging
individual instances into common
templates by eliminating certain details
about the instances. So basically you
take a bunch of things, you compare
them, you drop the details that don't
matter and what you're left with is an
abstraction and the key difference
between the two is that one operates
over a continuous domain and the other
operates over a discrete domain. So type
one or value centric abstraction is
about comparing things via a continuous
distance function and that's the kind of
abstraction that's behind uh perception
pattern cognition intuition and also of
course modern machine learning and type
two or programcentric abstraction is
about comparing discrete programs which
is to say graphs and instead of trying
to compute distances between them you're
going to be looking for uh exact
structure matching You're going to be
looking for exact isomorphisms, subgraph
isomeorphisms. And this is what
underlying much of human reasoning. It's
also what software engineers do when
they're refactoring some code. So if you
hear a software engineer talk about
abstraction, they mean this kind of
abstraction. So two kinds of abstraction
both driven by analogy making either
value analogy or program analogy. And
all cognition arises from a combination
of these two forms of abstraction. You
can remember them. They had left brain
versus right brain metaphor. One half
for perception, intuition, and the other
half for reasoning, planning, uh rigor.
And transformers are greats at type one
abstraction. They can do everything that
type one is effective for perception,
intuition, pattern cognition, they all
work well. So in that sense,
transformers are major breakthrough in
AI, but they're still not a good fit for
type two. And this is why you will
struggle to train one of these models to
do very simple type two things like
sorting a list or adding digits provided
as a sequence of tokens. So how are we
going to get to type two? You have to
leverage discrete program search as
opposed to purely manipulating
continuous interpolated spaces learn
with descent. Search is what unlocks
invention beyond just automation. All
known AI systems today that are capable
of some kind of uh uh invention, some
kind of creativity, they rely on
discrete search. Uh even back in the
90s, we were already using gigantic
search to come up with new antenna
designs. Or you can take uh Alph Go with
move 37 that was discrete search or more
recently the alpha evol system from deep
mind all discrete search systems. So
deep learning doesn't invent but search
does. So what's discrete program search?
It's basically combinatoral search over
graphs of operators taken from some
language, some DSL. And to better
understand it, you can try to draw an
analogy between program synthesis and
the machine learning techniques you
already know about. In machine learning,
your model is a differentiable
parametric function. So it's a curve. In
program synthesis, it's going to be a
discrete graph, a graph of ops, symbolic
ops from some language. In ML, your
learning engine, the way you create
models is gradient descent, which is
very comput efficient. By the way,
gradient descent will let you find a
model that fits the data very quickly,
very efficiently. In program synthesis,
the learning engine is searchal search,
which is extremely compute efficient.
Obviously in machine learning the key
obstacle that you run into is data
density. In order to fit a model you
need a dense sampling of the data
manifold. You need a lot of data and
program synthesis is the exact reverse.
Program synthes is extremely data
efficient. You can fit a program using
only two or three examples. But in order
to find that program you have to sift
through a vast space of potential
programs. And the size of that space
grows cuminally with problem complexity.
So you run into this communatoral
explosion wall. I said earlier that
intelligence is a combination of two
forms abstraction. Type one and type
two. And I really don't think that
you're going to go very far if you go
all in on just one of them. Like all in
on type one or all in on type two. I
think that if you want to really unlock
their potential, you have to combine
them together. And that's what human
intelligence is really good at. That's
really what makes us special. We combine
perception and intuition together with
explicit step-by-step reasoning. We
combine both forms of abstraction in all
our thoughts, all our actions
everywhere. For instance, when you're
playing chess, you're using type two.
when you calculate when you unfold some
potential moves step by step in your
mind. But you're not going to do this
for every possible move, of course,
because there are too many of them,
right? You're only going to be doing it
for a couple of different options,
right? Like here, you're going to look
at the knight, the queen. And the way
you narrow down these options is via
intuition, is via pattern recognition on
the board. So, and you build that up
very much through experience, right?
You've mined your past experience
unconsciously to extract these patterns
and that's very much type one. So you're
using type one intuition to make type
two calculation tractable. So how is the
merger between type one and type two
going to work? Well the key system two
technique is discrete search over a
space of program one and the blocker
that you run into is explosion. And
meanwhile the key system one technique
is uh curve fitting and interpolation on
the curve. So you take a lot of data,
you embed it on some kind of
interpolating manifold that enables fast
but approximate judgment calls about the
target space and the big idea is going
to be to leverage these fast but
approximate judgment calls to fight
commit explosion and make program search
tractable. A simple analogy to
understand this would be drawing a map.
So you take a space of discrete objects
with discrete relationships that would
normally require connectal search like
path finding on a subway system for
instance and you embed these objects uh
into a latent space where you can use a
continuous distance function to make
fast but approximate guesses about these
great relationships
and this enables you to keep explosion
in check while doing search
and this is what the full picture looks
like. This is the system that we are
currently working on. AI is going to
move towards systems that are more like
programmers that approach a new task by
writing software for it. And when faced
with a new task, your programmer like
metalarner will synthesize on the fly a
program or model that is adapted to the
task. And this program will blend uh
deep learning subm modules for type one
sub problems like perception for
instance and algorithmic modules uh for
type two sub problems. And these models
are going to be assembled by a discrete
program search system that is guided by
deep learning based intuition about the
structure of program space. And this
search process isn't done from scratch.
is going to leverage a global library of
reusable building blocks of
abstractions. And that library is
constantly evolving as it's learning
from incoming tasks. So when a new
problem appears, the system is going to
search through this library for relevant
building blocks. Uh and whenever in the
in the course of solving a new problem,
you're synthesizing a new building
block. You're going to be uploading it
back to the library. Much like as a
software engineer, if you develop a
useful library for your own work, you're
going to put it on GitHub. so that other
people can reuse it. And the ultimate
goal here is to have an AI that can face
a completely new situation and it's
going to use its rich abstraction
library uh to quickly assemble a working
model much like a human software
engineer can quickly create a piece of
software to solve a new problem by
leveraging existing tools in libraries.
And this AI is going to keep improving
itself over time both by expanding its
library of abstractions and also by
refining its intuition about the
structure of program space.
This system is what you are building at
India our new research lab. We started
India because we believe that in order
to dramatically accelerate scientific
progress we need AI that's capable of
independent invention and discovery. We
need AI that could expand the frontiers
of knowledge, not just uh operate within
them. And we really believe that a new
form of AI is going to be key to this
acceleration. Deep learning is great at
automation. It's incredibly powerful for
automation, but scientific discovery
requires something more. And our
approach at Tendia is to leverage a deep
learning guided uh program search to
build this uh programmer like
metalarner. And to test our progress,
our first milestone is going to be to
solve RKGI using a system that starts at
knowing nothing at all about RKGI.
And you ultimately want to leverage our
system for science to empower human
researchers and help accelerate the
timeline of science.